NE-1946: ingress: Add CRD Lifecycle Management for Gateway API (#1756)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md

must also avoid unnecessarily causing friction for Red Hat layered products,
partner products, and other third-party implementations.

### User Stories

#### Using OpenShift's Gateway API implementation on a new OpenShift cluster

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a new OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and then use
OpenShift's Gateway API implementation to configure ingress to a workload on
this cluster without having to deploy and then manage the lifecycle of any CRDs
thereafter.

#### Using OpenShift's Gateway API implementation on an upgraded cluster

As a cluster-admin, I want to upgrade my cluster from OpenShift 4.18 (which
*doesn't* manage the Gateway API CRDs' life-cycle) to OpenShift 4.19 (which
*does*). If a user on my cluster or I had previously installed Gateway API
CRDs and was managing their lifecycle, then I need OpenShift to explicitly
confirm consent from me to take over the management of these CRDs to avoid
disruptions to existing workloads.

#### Using a third-party Gateway API implementation

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a third-party Gateway API implementation
on my OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and use the third-party implementation without

> any interference from the first-party implementation. Relatedly, I want to be

Reviewer: May as well be explicit who the first-party is.
```suggestion
any interference from the OpenShift implementation. Relatedly, I want to be
```

able to utilize both the first-party and any third-party solution alongside
each other simultaneously and independently without any interference between the

> two.

Author: > The Goals don't seem to enable this story?
> Especially, there doesn't seem to be any way for a third-party implementation to protect itself from unknown/dead fields when CIO decides to update the CRDs.

Giving third party implementations consistent and documented Gateway API CRD versions to expect for any OCP version does help enable them to deploy, and deploy alongside other solutions in a predictable way. So that documentation, plus the "third party integrators" documentation which we will be producing will be some of the enablement. However, you are correct that we are particularly not providing any way to deal with dead fields. In fact, until https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3624 is resolved I don't think they'll be in great shape :thinking: 

I've added a note for our documentation team that we at least need to point this problem out to third party integrations for GA, and a note in aa574750003f1ac1b580d6da9e87db5551d056a6 to highlight that problem as well. Let me know if you feel that's sufficient for now, or if you think more needs to be done here (and what you're thinking specifically should be done)?

#### Future OpenShift upgrades

As a cluster-admin, I want to be able to receive updates to the Gateway API
resources via zstream (and major) releases to add new features and capabilities.

### Goals

> 

Reviewer: Probably the first goal should be:

Establish the owner of Gateway API CRDs as OpenShift Cluster Ingress Operator.

Author: ```suggestion
* Establish the owner of Gateway API CRDs as OpenShift Cluster Ingress Operator.
* Prevent upgrades on OpenShift Clusters that have non-matching Gateway API CRDs already installed.
```

- Ensure Gateway API CRDs are installed on new and upgraded OpenShift 4.19 clusters.
- Ensure the installed Gateway API CRDs are compatible with OpenShift's needs.
- Protect against bad updates or removals of the Gateway API CRDs.
- Detect and warn if an incompatible version of the CRDs is installed.
- Protect users against "unknown fields"/"dead fields" (defined below).

> - Provide a method to transfer ownership of previously existing CRDs to when upgrading from 4.18 to 4.19.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide a method to transfer ownership of previously existing CRDs to OpenShift Ingress Cluster Operator when upgrading from 4.18 to 4.19.
```

### Non-Goals

- _Automatically_ replace incompatible CRDs that some other agent installed.
- Provide an explicit override for the cluster-admin to take CRD ownership.
- Solve CRD life-cycle management in OLM.
- Solve OLM subscription management.

## Proposal

### CRD Life-cycle management

OpenShift's [Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)] will manage the _entire_
life-cycle of the Gateway API CRDs from here onward. The CIO will be packaged
along with a [Validating Admission Policy (VAP)] to block updates from sources

> other than the CIO, and will hold the CRDs at a specific `$CRD_VERSION`. In

Reviewer 2: ``` `$CRD_VERSION` ``` isn't referring to an actual variable or const, right?  
```suggestion
other than the CIO, and will hold the CRDs at a specific version. In
```

effect, this means that the **Gateway API resources will now be treated like a
core API.**

[Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)]:https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator
[Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/

#### CRD Deployment

The CIO will now check for the presence of the CRDs on the cluster, for
which there are two scenarios:

1. The CRDs are not present, so we create them
2. The CRDs are already present, so we need to take over management

The former is extremely straightforward and the correct version of the CRDs
will be applied.

The latter situation has more complexities. We'll refer to this process as "CRD
Management Succession", and cover its implications and logic below.

#### CRD Management Succession

Taking over the management of the Gateway API CRDs from a previous entity
can be tumultuous as we will require:

* no other actors managing the CRDs from here on out
* only standard CRDs can be deployed (no experimental)

> * the CRDs to be deployed at an exact version/schema

Reviewer 3: I wanted to discuss one point with regard to the ensuring of the exact version/schema. [NE-1952](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1952) suggests the usage of [crd-schema-checker](https://github.com/openshift/crd-schema-checker) which is a good tool but 1) it may be not trivial to be used as a module (not binary), 2) it cares about some details we may be indifferent about. After the upgrade (to 4.19) will be done, the gatewayapi-controller will override the contents of 4 GWAPI CRDs by doing a simple [go-cmp/cmp.Equal()](http://github.com/google/go-cmp/cmp.Equal()) [to compare actual vs desired](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/26f8b0f9c9fa30ff84f08f7e1f9da87aef431891/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayapi/crds.go#L115-L125). So, all unwanted versions will be gone from the CRDs. I'm thinking that the same simple comparison may be enough to detect a potential clash in 4.18.z.

I'm wondering what level of details we were expecting to get from crd-schema-checker and whether we really need them. The desired state of the CRDs is [stored in the operator's code](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/tree/92649ef453a5420100df5c2b0cceb9d97ce302d9/pkg/manifests/assets/gateway-api) so we know [the GWAPI bundle version](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/92649ef453a5420100df5c2b0cceb9d97ce302d9/pkg/manifests/assets/gateway-api/gateway.networking.k8s.io_gatewayclasses.yaml#L6) which we can report to the user as "expected" (without providing detailed description of what will change).

Reviewer 3: cc @JoelSpeed

Reviewer 4: > it may be not trivial to be used as a module (not binary)

I have experience of using it as a module, it's actually fairly straightforward

> it cares about some details we may be indifferent about.

This is configurable, but, there's also changes that could be made that it won't yet catch, it's not feature complete. There are various checks that @everettraven has implemented in his own [crd-diff](https://github.com/everettraven/crd-diff) project that you would want (thinks like limit changes).

We are working to try and create an upstream project combining both of these and focusing specifically on the changes that would break APIs, relying on that, if we get there in time would likely be better for the long run

> doing a simple [go-cmp/cmp.Equal()](https://github.com/google/go-cmp/cmp.Equal()) [to compare actual vs desired](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/26f8b0f9c9fa30ff84f08f7e1f9da87aef431891/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayapi/crds.go#L115-L125).

This seems like a reasonable approach, making sure they exactly match is a requirement I could see you imposing over time. The OpenAPI schema for a version is considered as an atomic unit IIRC

Reviewer 3: > > it cares about some details we may be indifferent about.
> 
> This is configurable, but, there's also changes that could be made that it won't yet catch, it's not feature complete. There are various checks that @everettraven has implemented in his own [crd-diff](https://github.com/everettraven/crd-diff) project that you would want (thinks like limit changes).

I see, so basically both tools (crd-shema-checker and crd-diff) seem to target _editors of CRDs_ to help them to not commit harmful changes. They can be used in a verify job in `openshift/api` repostiory, for instance.

I think our goal in [NE-1952](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1952) is sligthly different. We want to know whether GWAPI CRDs currently installed in the cluster match the desired ones. Will the desired version be incompatible or not? Do we really care about this? (I tend to say - no).

> We are working to try and create an upstream project combining both of these and focusing specifically on the changes that would break APIs, relying on that, if we get there in time would likely be better for the long run

Does this mean that you would not consider crd-schema-checker as production ready?

> The OpenAPI schema for a version is considered as an atomic unit IIRC

I'm not sure I managed to link this to our case. Will this somehow impact our implementation (on 4.18.z we will warn that OCP takes over GWAPI, on 4.19 we will update all GWAPI CRDs to desired definitions)?

Reviewer 4: > Does this mean that you would not consider crd-schema-checker as production ready?

At the moment, I think it has some rough edges and it's probably not what you'd want to use here. We have some work to do in the upstream version (when we get there) to get it to a point where I'd comfortably say integrate it in a wider context (eg there's not get out of jail free card right now)

> I'm not sure I managed to link this to our case.

I believe if someone updates any part of the schema, they update the whole schema as far as the API server is concerned. So it makes it hard for additions to be made, unless they are exclusively additive.

A DeepDerivative check would probably suffice for you IIUC, but DeepEqual would be more precise. It depends if you want to allow a schema that is slightly further ahead or not

Author: Reviewing this, it seems we are resolved that not using crd-schema-checker is OK. Please unresolve if there's more we need to cover here :saluting_face:

> can be tumultuous as we will require:
> 
> * no other actors managing the CRDs from here on out
> * only standard CRDs can be deployed (no experimental)
> * the CRDs to be deployed at an exact version/schema
> * OR the CRDs not to be present at all

Reviewer 2: This will read a little better with proper grammatical parallelism and punctuation: 
```suggestion
can be tumultuous as we will require the following:

* no other actors to be managing the CRDs from here on out,
* AND only standard CRDs to be deployed (no experimental),
* AND the CRDs to be deployed at an exact version/schema;
* OR the CRDs not to be present at all.
```

We will require this by providing a pre-upgrade check in the previous release
that verifies these are true and sets `Upgradable=false` if any of them are not.

> **Note**: Upstream Gateway API unfortunately layered experimental versions of
> CRDs on top of the same [Group/Version/Kind (GVK)] as the standard ones, so
> unfortunately for initial release users will be unable to use experimental as
> we can't deliver that as a part of our supported API surface. It will be
> feasible to add a gate to enable experimental later, but because of this
> layering this will not be a great user experience and will require the cluster
> to become tainted. We are tracking and supporting [an effort] in upstream
> Gateway API to separate experimental into its own group, which we expect to
> help move towards a better overall experience for users who want experimental
> Gateway API features going forward.

> **We simply can not anticipate all of the negative effects** succession will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**We simply cannot anticipate all of the negative effects** succession will
```

have on existing implementations if the cluster admin forces through the upgrade
check. As an extra precaution for users forcing upgrades precipitously, we will
provide an admin gate to both provide an extra warning and gather consent from
the cluster admin to take over the management of the CRDs. This will be

> accompanied by detailed documentation on what the admin should check and how to

Reviewer: If we use the standard "unsupported config override" for exceptions, we don't need to provide any documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
Unsupported config override will be used for exceptions.
```

previously installed Gateway API CRDs. The workflow consists of the pre-upgrade
checks and the post-upgrade checks.

### Pre-upgrade

1. In the CIO a pre-upgrade check verifies CRD presence
  * IF the CRDs are present
    * an admingate is created requiring acknowledgement of CRD succession
    * UNTIL the schema exactly matches the version we provide we set `Upgradable=false`
2. Once CRDs are not present OR are an exact match we set `Upgradable=true`

> **Note**: A **cluster-admin** is required for these steps.

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the previous release (4.18), but
> does not need to be carried forward to future releases as other logic exists
> there to handle Gateway API CRD state (see below).

### Post-upgrade

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the new release (4.19) and onward.

1. The CIO is hereafter deployed alongside its CRD protection [Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]
2. The CIO constantly checks for the presence of the CRDs
  * IF the CRDs are present
    * UNTIL the CRD schema matches what is expected, the CIO upgrades them
    * IF the upgrade fails `Degraded` status is set
  * ELSE the CRDs are deployed by the CIO

> > **Note**: If we reach `Degraded` its expected that some tampering has

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: If we reach `Degraded`, it's expected that some tampering must have
```

> manually changed the CRDs). For the initial release we will simply require
> manual intervention (support) to fix this as we can't guess too well at the
> original intent behind the change. In future iterations we may consider more
> solutions if this becomes a common problem for some reason.

[Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/

### API Extensions

None.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Hypershift runs the Ingress Operator on the management cluster but configured
with a kubeconfig to manage resources on the guest cluster.  This means that the
Ingress Operator manages the Gateway API CRDs on the guest cluster, the same as
on standalone clusters.

#### Standalone Clusters

For standalone clusters, the Ingress Operator manages the Gateway API CRD
life-cycle so that Gateway API can be configured and used post-install.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

The Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO) will be used to deploy and manage the
lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs for applicable clusters. CRDs and their
management are not particularly resource intensive.

> The CIO covers Single Node Deployments. MicroShift however, does not run the
> CIO has its own design for supporting Gateway API (see the [MicroShift Gateway
> API Support Enhancement]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CIO covers Single Node Deployments for some operations, but not CIO on MicroShift.  MicroShift has its own design for supporting Gateway API (see the [MicroShift Gateway
API Support Enhancement]).
```

[MicroShift Gateway API Support Enhancement]:../microshift/gateway-api-support.md

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> What are some important details that didn't come across above in the
> **Proposal**? Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might be
> a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate. While it is useful
> to go into the details of the code changes required, it is not necessary to show

> > how the code will be rewritten in the enhancement.

Reviewer: You can just add a TBD here for now.

Author: ```suggestion
> What are some important details that didn't come across above in the
> **Proposal**? Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might be
> a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate. While it is useful
> to go into the details of the code changes required, it is not necessary to show
> how the code will be rewritten in the enhancement.

TBD
```

> 

Reviewer: We do need some mention of where the CRDs will be stored.  Will they be stored in openshift/api or somewhere else?

Reviewer 4: If these are upstream CRDs, then generally they are copied into the relevant operator's repository to be injected into the payload directly, or through operator installation conditionally

Author: ```suggestion
The CRDs will be hosted alongside the rest of the CIO's manifests.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Unknown Fields

> **Note**: aka "dead fields"

The definition of the "unknown fields" problem is provided upstream in
[gateway-api#3624], which goes into details about the effects on Gateway API
implementations, and what can generally go wrong. Since this problem does not
have any standards or solutions defined in upstream at the time of writing we
will address this by pinning to one specific version of the Gateway API CRDs
that is tested and vetted by us to ensure "dead fields" will not cause harm to
users of the corresponding version of our first-party implementation. When the

> upstream community provides standards and solution around this we will implement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upstream community provides standards and solution around this we will evaluate
```

    - Verify none of the above can even be done with a present VAP

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

This stage covers basic management for the Gateway API CRDs behind the feature
gate, but without the [Validating Admission Policy (VAP)], allowing them to be
disabled and for someone else to deploy and manage them.

[Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/

### Tech Preview -> GA

This stage covers the CRD version bump, the [Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]
is added (blocking anyone but the platform from deploying or managing Gateway
API CRDs), and the pre-upgrade and post-upgrade checks to ensure CRD management
succession are in place in the Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO).

[Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A.

### Tech Preview -> GA

- End-to-end tests in the Ingress Operator.
- Upgrade testing with conflicting CRDs.
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature

> N/A.

Reviewer: It's worth mentioning we need to remove the [code](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/tree/master/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayapi) that currently manages CRDS in Cluster Ingress Operator.

Author: ```suggestion
The previous technical preview code for managing Gateway API CRDs will be removed in favor of the new logic in the CIO.
```

any interference from the OpenShift implementation. Relatedly, I want to be
able to utilize both the first-party and any third-party solution alongside
each other simultaneously and independently without any interference between the
two.

#### Future OpenShift upgrades

As a cluster-admin, I want to be able to receive updates to the Gateway API
resources via zstream (and major) releases to add new features and capabilities.

### Goals

- Establish the owner of Gateway API CRDs as OpenShift Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO).
- Prevent upgrades on OpenShift Clusters that have incompatible Gateway API CRDs already installed.
- Ensure Gateway API CRDs are installed on new and upgraded OpenShift 4.19 clusters.
- Ensure the installed Gateway API CRDs are compatible with OpenShift's needs.
- Protect against bad updates or removals of the Gateway API CRDs.
- Detect and warn if an incompatible version of the CRDs is installed.
- Protect users against "unknown fields"/"dead fields" (defined below).
- Provide a method to transfer ownership of previously existing CRDs to OpenShift Ingress Cluster Operator when upgrading from 4.18 to 4.19.

### Non-Goals

> - _Automatically_ replace incompatible CRDs that some other agent installed.

Author: Right, this has changed :+1: 

```suggestion
```

CRDs will be fully managed via the platform from here on out, so they only need
to interface with the upgrade workflow on the condition that their cluster had
previously installed Gateway API CRDs. The workflow consists of the pre-upgrade
checks and the post-upgrade checks.

### Pre-upgrade

1. In the CIO a pre-upgrade check verifies CRD presence
  * IF the CRDs are present
    * an admingate is created requiring acknowledgement of CRD succession
    * UNTIL the schema exactly matches the version we provide we set `Upgradable=false`
2. Once CRDs are not present OR are an exact match we set `Upgradable=true`

> **Note**: A **cluster-admin** is required for these steps.

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the previous release (4.18), but
> does not need to be carried forward to future releases as other logic exists
> there to handle Gateway API CRD state (see below).

### Post-upgrade

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the new release (4.19) and onward.

1. The CIO is hereafter deployed alongside its CRD protection [Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]
2. The CIO constantly checks for the presence of the CRDs
  * IF the CRDs are present

>     * UNTIL there are no unexpected CRDs, the CIO removes any unexpected CRDs

Reviewer 4: A VAP is preventing someone from installing these, so to even get to this step, someone has removed the VAP? Which should be auto-recreated right?

>     * UNTIL the CRD schema matches what is expected, the CIO upgrades them

Reviewer 3: Plus `UNTIL there are no unexpected CRDs, the CIO removes them`. Ref: [Slack thread](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CBWMXQJKD/p1741874884734069?thread_ts=1741789249.557309&cid=CBWMXQJKD).

Author: :+1:

```suggestion
    * UNTIL there are no unexpected CRDs, the CIO removes any unexpected CRDs
    * UNTIL the CRD schema matches what is expected, the CIO upgrades the otherwise expected CRDs
```

>     * IF the upgrade fails `Degraded` status is set

Reviewer 3: The failures to upgrade will be retried as part of the controller-runtime's reconciliation loop (errors result into immediate re-queue). I'm wondering how the ingress operator will be able to detect a degraded state. Especially taking into account [the definition](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/7dc12cf28557f8c80460435649cfc393761e0285/vendor/github.com/openshift/api/config/v1/types_cluster_operator.go#L168-L184) of `Degraded` which implies a certain time period in degraded state:
```
    // Degraded indicates that the component (operator and all configured operands)
    // does not match its desired state over a period of time resulting in a lower
    // quality of service. The period of time may vary by component, but a Degraded
    // state represents persistent observation of a condition. As a result, a
    // component should not oscillate in and out of Degraded state.
```

Author: Right, we do need to decide what the mechanism is going to be. From the perspective of the EP however would it not suffice to say:

```suggestion
    * IF the upgrade fails persistently, `Degraded` status is set
```

And then we can determine the right mechanism to do that? Or do you prefer that we explain that mechanism here?

Reviewer 3: No, this would go too much into technical details most of which we don't understand fully as of now. I'm fine to close this one. Adding `persistently,` won't hurt, for sure.

supported API surface for ingress traffic, and also have no control over which
version of the APIs are present, or if they are even present at all (e.g. the
cluster admin decides to delete them).

To make this situation a bit easier we do anticipate providing some updates
after the initial release. We want to eventually allow version _ranges_ in
time after we resolve the "dead fields" problem (see more in the section about
this above) which we expect to provide significantly more flexibility and take
care of many concerns that would come from this change. We are also tracking and
supporting [upstream efforts] to separate experimental APIs out into their own
group, which will provide more flexibility when users want experimental features.

[upstream efforts]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/3497

## Test Plan

The Ingress Operator will have tests to validate the intended functionality
outlined in this EP:

- CIO Tests that verify the pre-upgrade check logic
- CIO Tests that verify the post-upgrade logic:
    - Delete the CRDs; verify that the operator re-installs them
    - Install incompatible CRDs; verify that the operator reports `Degraded`

>     - Install experimental CRDs; verify that the operator reports `Degraded`

Reviewer 4: Is this correct, or is the operator removing these now?

Author: This is correct, specifically this is for the tests: if the experimental APIs somehow become present we go degraded. We want to make experimental available in a later release, but for initial release we're being very strict about it not being present because it can cause some issues. We are considering a very deliberate way to enable Experimental later, where the cluster gets set to `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` and then the user can do what they like with Experimental, but that's expected to be a future enhancement proposal and for now :lock:.

---
title: gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management
authors:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@shaneutt"
reviewers:
  - "@shaneutt" # Gateway API maintainer.
  - "@dgn" # OSSM maintainer.
  - "@JoelSpeed" # SME for a similar issue and solution in CAPI.
  - "@knobunc" # Staff engineer for Networking, involved in past discussions.
approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
  - "@knobunc"
api-approvers:
  - None
creation-date: 2025-01-22
last-updated: 2025-01-27
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1946
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md"
---

# Gateway API CRD Life-Cycle Management

This enhancement describes how the [Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)] manages
Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs).

[Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)]:https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator

## Summary

A key goal of Gateway API is to nurture a diverse ecosystem of implementations.
These implementations, including OpenShift's, all rely on the same Gateway API

> CRDs.  To these ends, OpenShift must manage the life-cycle of these CRDs in a

Author: fixed ty :+1:

way that enables Red Hat to support the product, minimizes friction for the
end-user, provides consistency, and avoids causing conflicts with other
implementations that rely on these CRDs.

## Motivation

> Gateway API is an evolving API, and its CRDs change over time.  For core

Author: Correct.

> Gateway API is an evolving API, and its CRDs change over time.  For core

Author: Correct. A note has been added now about how expectations of stability. :+1:

OpenShift, we must ensure that we have a version of the CRDs that is compatible
with our product, and we must handle upgrading these CRDs for our own needs.  We
must also avoid unnecessarily causing friction for Red Hat layered products,
partner products, and other third-party implementations.

### User Stories

#### Using OpenShift's Gateway API implementation on a new OpenShift cluster

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a new OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and then use

> OpenShift's Gateway API implementation to configure ingress to workload on this

Author: fixed ty :+1:

cluster without having to deploy and then manage the lifecycle of any CRDs
thereafter.

#### Using OpenShift's Gateway API implementation on an upgraded cluster

As a cluster-admin, I want to upgrade my cluster from OpenShift 4.18 (which
*doesn't* manage the Gateway API CRDs' life-cycle) to OpenShift 4.19 (which

> *does*). If a user on my cluster or I myself had Gateway API CRDs installed

Author: fixed ty 👍

> previously and was managing their lifecycle, I need OpenShift to explicitly

Author: fixed ty 👍

confirm consent from me to take over the management of these CRDs to avoid
disruptions to existing workloads.

#### Using a third-party Gateway API implementation

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a third-party Gateway API implementation
on my OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and use the third-party implementation without

> any interference from the first-party implementation. Relatedly I want to be

Author: fixed ty 👍

able to utilize both the first-party and any third-party solution alongside
each other simultaneously and independently without any interference between the
two.

#### Future OpenShift upgrades

As a cluster-admin, I want to upgrade my cluster from OpenShift 4.19 (which

> manages the Gateway API CRDs' life-cycle) to OpenShift 4.20 (which includes a

Author: Yes it is :+1:

[OpenShift Service Mesh (OSSM)]:https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh

#### CRD Deployment

The CIO will now check for the presence of the CRDs on the cluster, for
which there are two scenarios:

1. The CRDs are not present, so we create them
2. The CRDs are already present, so we need to take over management

The former is extremely straightforward and the correct version of the CRDs
will be applied.

The latter situation has more complexities. We'll refer to this process as "CRD
Management Succession", and cover it's implications and logic below.

#### CRD Management Succession

Taking over the management of the Gateway API CRDs from a previous entity
can be turmultuous as we will require:

* no other actors managing the CRDs from here on out
* only standard CRDs can be deployed (no experimental)
* the CRDs to be deployed at an exact version/schema
* OR the CRDs not to be present at all

We will require this by providing a pre-upgrade check in the previous release
that verifies these are true and sets `Upgradable=false` if any of them are not.

> **Note**: Upstream Gateway API unfortunately layered experimental versions of

> > CRDs on top of the same GVK as the standard ones, so unfortunately for initial

Author: Yes, sounds good :+1:

> release users will be unable to use experimental as we can't deliver that as
> a part of our supported API surface. It will be feasible to add a gate to
> enable experimental later, but because of this layering this will not be a
> great user experience and will require the cluster to become tainted. We are

> > tracking and supporting [an effort] in upstream Gateway API to separate

Author: Yep, it will work like that:

[an effort]

Sometimes I prefer this because I read in vim a lot, and it makes the URLs less cluttery.

[an effort]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ

> > tracking and supporting [an effort] in upstream Gateway API to separate

Reviewer 5: Huh TIL.  Thanks!

> experimental into its own group, which we expect to help move towards a better
> overall experience for users who want experimental Gateway API features going

> > forward.

Author: This is something we've discussed, but we decided to keep things simple for GA we would have _no_ support of experimental on day one and we would add it later if requests for it come in. Also note that in upstream there is [considerable debate](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/3497) about how experimental should even work in the future, so we kinda want to wait and see the dust settle on that.

**We simply can not anticipate all of the negative effects** succession will
have on existing implementations if the cluster admin forces through the upgrade
check. As an extra precaution for users forcing upgrades precipitously, we will
provide an admin gate to both provide an extra warning and gather consent from
the cluster admin to take over the management of the CRDs. This will be
accompanied by detailed documentation on what the admin should check and how to
fufill the checks, which will also be linked from the description provided in
the admin gate.

The admin will be responsible for ensuring the safety of succession. If they
force through the pre-upgrade check AND the admin gate, the admin gate will be
left behind to help aid investigation of the cause of problems when the upgrade

> goes wrong.

Author: added :+1:

[an effort]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/3497

### Workflow Description

The workflow in this case is an upgrade process. From the _user_ perspective the
CRDs will be fully managed via the platform from here on out, so they only need
to interface with the upgrade workflow on the condition that their cluster had
previously installed Gateway API CRDs. The workflow consists of the pre-upgrade
checks and the post-upgrade checks.

### Pre-upgrade

1. In the CIO a pre-upgrade check verifies CRD presence
  * IF the CRDs are present
    * an admingate is created requiring acknowledgement of CRD succession

>     * UNTIL the schema matches an exact versions we set `Upgradable=false`

Author: sg! :+1:

> 2. Once CRDs are not present OR an exact match we set `Upgradable=true`

Author: :+1:

> **Note**: A **cluster-admin** is required for these steps.

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the previous release (4.18), but
> does not need to be carried forward to future releases as other logic exists
> there to handle Gateway API CRD state (see below).

### Post-upgrade

> **Note**: The logic for these lives in in the new release (4.19) and onward.

> 1. The CIO is hereafter deployed alongside its CRD protection VAP

Author: added 👍

    * UNTIL the CRD schema matches what is expected, the CIO upgrades them
    * IF the upgrade fails `Degraded` status is set
  * ELSE the CRDs are deployed by the CIO

> **Note**: If we reach `Degraded` its expected that some tampering has
> occurred (e.g. a cluster-admin has for some reason destroyed our VAP and
> manually changed the CRDs). For the initial release we will simply require
> manual intervention (support) to fix this as we can't guess too well at the
> original intent behind the change. In future iterations we may consider more
> solutions if this becomes a common problem for some reason.

### API Extensions

None.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Hypershift runs the Ingress Operator on the management cluster but configured
with a kubeconfig to manage resources on the guest cluster.  This means that the
Ingress Operator manages the Gateway API CRDs on the guest cluster, the same as
on standalone clusters.

#### Standalone Clusters

For standalone clusters, the Ingress Operator manages the Gateway API CRD
life-cycle so that Gateway API can be configured and used post-install.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

> The CRDs themselves use minimal resources.  Creating a GatewayClass CR can cause

Author: sg, broke up the sentences :+1:

> the Ingress Operator to install OpenShift Service Mesh, which in turn installs

Reviewer 4: You could create a VAP set to WARN that would notify a user that their action implicitly enables service mesh, and give them some feedback there, might be a useful addition

Author: Interestingly we _don't_ enable service mesh. It's kinda weird, but we're literally just using Istio for it's ingress Gateway capabilities (i.e. we don't deploy `istio-cni`, or allow any use of service mesh features, etc). We're wanting more distinctive support for this use case in the future, which the OSSM team has been helping us with. For the deployment of OSSM we'll be doing, the Gateway API resources are the _only_ API surface we will be supporting (in fact [we want to soft block someone trying going around this](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1966)). All that said, we recently split the feature gates for the gateway API CRDs and the OSSM implementation, so OSSM is no longer a part of this and the EP was a bit out of date. This is now updated to remove references to OSSM, LMKWYT

Author: We intend to make the service mesh components of OSSM inaccessible in this deployment, could you help me to better understand what you envision this warning saying, and what explicit action would trigger it?

Istio and Envoy (see the [gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator](gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md)
enhancement proposal), which use considerable resources.  For Single-Node
OpenShift, the cluster-admin might be advised to pay particular attention to
OSSM's resource requirements and the cluster's resource constraints before
attempting to use Gateway API.

MicroShift does not run the Ingress Operator and has its own design for
supporting Gateway API (see the MicroShift [gateway-api-support](../microshift/gateway-api-support.md)
enhancement).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> What are some important details that didn't come across above in the
> **Proposal**? Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might be
> a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate. While it is useful
> to go into the details of the code changes required, it is not necessary to show
> how the code will be rewritten in the enhancement.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Unknown Fields

> **Note**: aka "dead fields"

> The definition of the "unknown fields" problem is provided upstream in

Reviewer 4: Can you provide a brief explanation of what might happen for alternative implementations? It would be good to understand the risks our customers might face

Or do you think that's a bit scope creepy for this doc?

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3624 (linked above) goes into more detail about the bad and worst cases that can arise from this problem, but I also updated the section above to be more clear that's where that information can be found. Let me know if you think that's sufficient ? If you prefer we talk more directly about it in this doc that's OK too.

Reviewer: I agree with Joel, a brief explanation with a pointer to the upstream discussion would be great.

Reviewer 4: I think what' you've added makes sense and helps, but giving a specific explanation of what might be seen might also help folks understand what impact dead fields might have, without having to explore the gateway-api issue linked, maybe something like:
```
For a third party implementation, that does not support the version of our Gateway API CRDs,
it may be possible for a user to specify a field, that has no effect immediately, but takes effect
once the implementation is later upgraded.
This could be confusing for end users, or could break their ingress during the upgrade, or it could even lead the user to incorrectly believe that their their endpoints are secure where the dead field is security related.
```
Just trying to hammer home why this is an important thing to consider

Author: ```suggestion
The definition of the "unknown fields" problem is provided upstream in
For a third party implementation, that does not support the version of our Gateway API CRDs,
it may be possible for a user to specify a field, that has no effect immediately, but takes effect
once the implementation is later upgraded.
This could be confusing for end users, or could break their ingress during the upgrade, or it could even lead the user to incorrectly believe that their their endpoints are secure where the dead field is security related.
```

Author: 78e5da5c9f40452147bd4daf35bc365e42df85ef includes a reworked version of the above which also includes some special notes about how we're going to document this for implementers. LMKWYT?

> [gateway-api#3624]. Since this problem does not have any standards or solutions

Author: It is!

defined in upstream at the time of writing we will address this by pinning to
one specific version of the Gateway API CRDs that is tested and vetted by us to

> ensure freedom from "dead fields" with the corresponding version of our

Author: Updated the language here.

> I think we may pick a version that is later than the one that OSSM has chosen. We should be a responsible steward of the platform API if we truly believe that 3rd parties will be able to use it.

Right, the above wasn't meant to preclude that notion. I've changed the language to be more clear that we'll set a version that's "safe" but not lock us into language that says "we will always have the _exact_ version OSSM asks for". :+1:

first-party implementation. When the upstream community provides standards and
solution around this we will implement that solution.

[gateway-api#3624]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3624

### Drawbacks

> The idea is to find the best form of an argument why this enhancement should
> _not_ be implemented.
>
> What trade-offs (technical/efficiency cost, user experience, flexibility,
> supportability, etc) must be made in order to implement this? What are the reasons
> we might not want to undertake this proposal, and how do we overcome them?
>
> Does this proposal implement a behavior that's new/unique/novel? Is it poorly
> aligned with existing user expectations?  Will it be a significant maintenance
> burden?  Is it likely to be superceded by something else in the near future?

The key tradeoff is that we will start treating Gateway API effectively as if
it were a core API. This means any perceived value someone might see in being

> able to manage and upgrade the Gateway API resources themselves, independently

Author: > I think we should be a little more explicit and say that a 3rd party GWAPI implementation can not bring API changes that are not defined in the version we have picked. So if a customer wants to install a much later version on an old openshift version, the new features will not be available in the api.

:+1: 

> We should also say that gwapi has stabilized

Added :+1:

of the platform version, will be lost.

> **Note**: This "downside" can actually be an upside for integrators, as we've
> heard from projects which have Gateway API integrations (such as OSSM) which
> appreciate having a consistent and known version of Gateway API on the
> cluster which they can always rely on being there.

Unfortunately this is not really an avoidable problem, as it is not tenable for
us to simultaneously say that we support Gateway API as a primary and fully
supported API surface for ingress traffic, and also have no control over which
version of the APIs are present, or if they are even present at all (e.g. the
cluster admin decides to delete them).

To make this situation a bit easier we do anticipate providing some updates
after the initial release. We want to eventually allow version _ranges_ in

> time after we resolve the "dead fields" problem (see more in the section about

Author: Noted in the linked Gateway API issue is the upcoming [HTTP Auth](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1494/) enhancement, which is very likely to trip this and create a period of time with some safety issues.

this above) which we expect to provide significantly more flexibility and take
care of many concerns that would come from this change. We are also tracking and
supporting [upstream efforts] to separate experimental APIs out into their own
group, which will provide more flexibility when users want experimental features.

[upstream efforts]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/3497

## Test Plan

The Ingress Operator will have tests to validate the intended functionality
outlined in this EP:

- CIO Tests that verify the pre-upgrade check logic
- CIO Tests that verify the post-upgrade logic:
    - Delete the CRDs; verify that the operator re-installs them
    - Install incompatible CRDs; verify that the operator reports `Degraded`
    - Install experimental CRDs; verify that the operator reports `Degraded`
    - Verify none of the above can even be done with a present VAP

## Graduation Criteria

> Note that Gateway API CRD life-cycle management will be part of the

Author: This is out of date, it's been updated with criteria specific to this feature which as you pointed out, recently did become it's own entire feature.

[gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator](gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md) enhancement, which defines its
own graduation criteria.

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A.

### Tech Preview -> GA

- End-to-end tests in the Ingress Operator.
- Upgrade testing with conflicting CRDs.
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A.

## Version Skew Strategy

> **Note**:see operational aspects of API extensions below.

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> 

Author: Whoops, yes it was missing. fixed! :+1:

> 

Reviewer 2: Isn't it enough to say that the CIO-installed CRDs will remain in place on downgrade?  If the cluster-admin needs to delete and re-add another version of the CRDs, that's up to the cluster-admin's discretion.

>     CVO does not currently delete resources that no longer exist in
>     the target version.

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Other products and components that have Gateway API support will now be able to
consistently know that Gateway API will already be present on the cluster, and
which version will be present given the version of OpenShift. There will no
longer be a need for them to document having their users deploy the CRDs
manually or do any management themselves that could conflict.

We are already aware of several projects which utilize Gateway API including
(but not limited to):

* OpenShift Service Mesh
* Kuadrant
* OpenShift AI Serving

We will coordinate with these projects and others from release to release on
their needs related to Gateway API version support. We expect over time that
more flexibility with the version will eventually be needed, and we anticipate
adding ranges of support instead of specific versions to accomodate this.

## Support Procedures

### Conflicting CRDs

The pre-upgrade checks should eliminate any problems with CRD conflicts.
However it is always _technically possible_ for the admin to force through both

> the pre-upgrade check AND the admin gate. If they do this the CIO will detect

Author: This changed after we wrote this, it doesn't do this now. Fixed!

the mismatching schema and report a `Degraded` status condition with status
`True` and a message explaining the problem.

In this situation the cluster-admin then has to go back and follow the upgrade
instructions regarding Gateway API CRDs correctly and fix the state on the
cluster before we can move out of degraded.

## Alternatives

> ### Use an admin-ack gate to block upgrades if incompatible CRDs exist

Author: Yes, this is out of date. Fixed :+1:

> ### Use an admin-ack gate to block upgrades if incompatible CRDs exist

Reviewer 2: We use an admin-ack gate to block upgrades if **any** Gateway API CRDs exist.

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a new OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and then use
OpenShift's Gateway API implementation to configure ingress to workload on this
cluster without having to deploy and then manage the lifecycle of any CRDs
thereafter.

#### Using OpenShift's Gateway API implementation on an upgraded cluster

As a cluster-admin, I want to upgrade my cluster from OpenShift 4.18 (which
*doesn't* manage the Gateway API CRDs' life-cycle) to OpenShift 4.19 (which
*does*). If a user on my cluster or I myself had Gateway API CRDs installed
previously and was managing their lifecycle, I need OpenShift to explicitly
confirm consent from me to take over the management of these CRDs to avoid
disruptions to existing workloads.

#### Using a third-party Gateway API implementation

As a cluster-admin, I want to install a third-party Gateway API implementation
on my OpenShift 4.19 cluster, and use the third-party implementation without
any interference from the first-party implementation. Relatedly I want to be
able to utilize both the first-party and any third-party solution alongside
each other simultaneously and independently without any interference between the

> two.

Author: This is less about the CRDs specifically, and more just the user story about wanting to be able to have multiple implementations co-existing on the cluster. To your question though, yes the idea is they _must_ be able to work with the versions pinned by OCP in order to do this as an implementation detail.

#### Future OpenShift upgrades

As a cluster-admin, I want to upgrade my cluster from OpenShift 4.19 (which
manages the Gateway API CRDs' life-cycle) to OpenShift 4.20 (which includes a
newer version of these CRDs).

### Goals

- Ensure Gateway API CRDs are installed on new and upgraded OpenShift 4.19 clusters.
- Ensure the installed Gateway API CRDs are compatible with OpenShift's needs.
- Protect against bad updates or removals of the Gateway API CRDs.
- Detect and warn if an incompatible version of the CRDs is installed.
- Protect users against "dead fields" (defined below).
- Provide a method to transfer ownership of previously existing CRDs to when upgrading from 4.18 to 4.19.

### Non-Goals

- _Automatically_ replace incompatible CRDs that some other agent installed.

> - Provide an _automatic_ pre-upgrade check in OpenShift 4.18 for incompatible CRDs.

Author: Just realized this non-goal is way out of date, and comes from an earlier iteration. It's now been removed. To your question: logic in CIO, however that is now a requirement we received during arch review.

> - Provide an explicit override for the cluster-admin to take CRD ownership.

Author: No sorry that wasn't the intention here with this non-goal. Let's reword this:

```suggestion
- Providing ANY mechanism for the cluster-admin or another entity to take ownership of the CRD
```

> - Provide an explicit override for the cluster-admin to take CRD ownership.

Reviewer: Some customers and our cross-teammates using Gateway API may need to use upstream features while they are still experimental in order to test their own operations or development.  Therefore, we **have** to provide an override, but in the case of an override, the cluster becomes unsupported.  We have a precedent ("unsupported config override").

[Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)]:https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator
[Validating Admission Policy (VAP)]:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/
[OpenShift Service Mesh (OSSM)]:https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh

#### CRD Deployment

The CIO will now check for the presence of the CRDs on the cluster, for
which there are two scenarios:

1. The CRDs are not present, so we create them
2. The CRDs are already present, so we need to take over management

The former is extremely straightforward and the correct version of the CRDs
will be applied.

The latter situation has more complexities. We'll refer to this process as "CRD
Management Succession", and cover it's implications and logic below.

#### CRD Management Succession

Taking over the management of the Gateway API CRDs from a previous entity
can be turmultuous as we will require:

* no other actors managing the CRDs from here on out
* only standard CRDs can be deployed (no experimental)
* the CRDs to be deployed at an exact version/schema
* OR the CRDs not to be present at all

We will require this by providing a pre-upgrade check in the previous release

> that verifies these are true and sets `upgradable=false` if any of them are not.

Author: fixed in ca27c593c2de00d83e06f01a9a2ffc6ee44dcf0b!

> that verifies these are true and sets `upgradable=false` if any of them are not.

Reviewer 2: It should be `Upgradeable=False` ("Upgrad**e**" + "able", capital 'F' "**F**alse").

accompanied by detailed documentation on what the admin should check and how to
fufill the checks, which will also be linked from the description provided in
the admin gate.

The admin will be responsible for ensuring the safety of succession. If they
force through the pre-upgrade check AND the admin gate, the admin gate will be
left behind to help aid investigation of the cause of problems when the upgrade
goes wrong.

[an effort]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/3497

### Workflow Description

> Explain how the user will use the feature. Be detailed and explicit.  Describe
> all of the actors, their roles, and the APIs or interfaces involved. Define a
> starting state and then list the steps that the user would need to go through to
> trigger the feature described in the enhancement. Optionally add a
> [mermaid](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid#readme) sequence diagram.
>
> Use sub-sections to explain variations, such as for error handling,
> failure recovery, or alternative outcomes.

**cluster-admin** is a human user responsible for managing a cluster.

1. Start with a 4.18 cluster with conflicting CRDs.

> 2. Upgrade to 4.19.

Reviewer 3: I suppose that we should acknowledge the admin gate before upgrading.

Author: This section was also out-of-date, and from a previous iteration. Updated in 50fcb989d70734ff36e8f78bb88ee9eac31d2dcf LMKWYT?

3. Check clusteroperators, see a conflict.

> 4. Run some `oc` command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Run some `oc` command to fix the conflict.
```

Author: Section out-of-date, now updated in 50fcb989d70734ff36e8f78bb88ee9eac31d2dcf LMKWYT

it were a core API. This means any perceived value someone might see in being
able to manage and upgrade the Gateway API resources themselves, independently
of the platform version, will be lost.

> **Note**: This "downside" can actually be an upside for integrators, as we've
> heard from projects which have Gateway API integrations (such as OSSM) which
> appreciate having a consistent and known version of Gateway API on the
> cluster which they can always rely on being there.

Unfortunately this is not really an avoidable problem, as it is not tenable for
us to simultaneously say that we support Gateway API as a primary and fully
supported API surface for ingress traffic, and also have no control over which
version of the APIs are present, or if they are even present at all (e.g. the
cluster admin decides to delete them).

To make this situation a bit easier we do anticipate providing some updates
after the initial release. We want to eventually allow version _ranges_ in
time after we resolve the "dead fields" problem (see more in the section about
this above) which we expect to provide significantly more flexibility and take

> care of many concerns that would come from thsi change. We are also tracking and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
care of many concerns that would come from this change. We are also tracking and
```

Author: fixed in 01ed78e1ca09cac2fe5617af30985ab43b7cc954 ty!

Other products and components that have Gateway API support will now be able to
consistently know that Gateway API will already be present on the cluster, and
which version will be present given the version of OpenShift. There will no
longer be a need for them to document having their users deploy the CRDs
manually or do any management themselves that could conflict.

We are already aware of several projects which utilize Gateway API including
(but not limited to):

* OpenShift Service Mesh
* Kuadrant
* OpenShift AI Serving

We will coordinate with these projects and others from release to release on
their needs related to Gateway API version support. We expect over time that
more flexibility with the version will eventually be needed, and we anticipate
adding ranges of support instead of specific versions to accomodate this.

## Support Procedures

### Conflicting CRDs

The pre-upgrade checks should eliminate any problems with CRD conflicts.
However it is always _technically possible_ for the admin to force through both
the pre-upgrade check AND the admin gate. If they do this the CIO will detect
the mismatching schema and report a `Degraded` status condition with status

> `True` and a message explaining the problem.

Reviewer 3: Did you mean `Upgradeable=false` or I'm missing something?

Author: It is my understanding that we will set the condition named `Degraded` and set it (itself) to `True`.

Author: Yes. Let me know though if you think any further clarification is needed!

Author: Sounds good, I added further clarification in the notes for the workflow in e66cab039588f180762adfe9e8d413745644d3f1, LMKWYT?
